# Why [DNA Compiler](https://github.com/isaacguerreir/dnacompiler) exist

One upon a time at John von Neumman's laboratory, one of his students created a simple assembler that could transform a text file with some language synthax into binary code. Von Neumman discovered and became furious at him, for wasting precious machine time doing the assembly. Some years later, when John Backus and friends came up with this idea called FORTRAN, this so called high-level language where you could write out your formulas, as if you're writing mathematical notation, you could write loops, this was shown to assembly programmer, and once again they don't see any value in that, they don't get it.

DNA is sometimes refer as the source code of life, and I agree. So, when Synthetic Biologists are designing genetic circuits they're programming living things by directly manipulating the equivalent of binary. When Synthetic Biology emerges in beginning of 2000, one of the main ideas is to use abstraction and layering trying to move from a more a sequence-centric way of genetic engineering to a more functional. However, even 20 years after this we're still designing genetic circuits looking directly to DNA sequence instead designing by functionalities.  

How to move from a more sequence-centric view to a functional way of design? Let's start by defining that even if the final product of Genetic Design is a DNA Sequence, the real goal is to make a DNA Sequence that have have fullfil a specific requirement. So doesn't matter the sequence content, if two sequences generate the same requirements, from a Design perspective, they could be understand as equal. Most of software engineers never looked for practical binary code, and only a small fraction deals with executable code, most because compilers advanced throught time until became very good to translate high-level procedures in binary executable code that could be understand by computers. What about make a DNA compiler that translate high-level constrains and requirements in DNA code? Is it possible? Could produced designs be equal as human designed sequences?

To answer this questions I created [DNA Compiler](https://github.com/isaacguerreir/dnacompiler).
